iteration, bulk appendix (#1)
ExaWorks/job-api-spec: specification.md

exec/popen.

- [ ] add some text about pilot jobs / reslicing
      AM: IMHO, the easiest way to represent such hierarchies in the API is to
      be able to obtain a JobExecutor from a (pilot) Job.  Alternatively,
      a pilot job entering ACTIVE state can provide a JobExecutor endpoint as
      metda data - but then we would require the non-standardized meta data to

>       be used.

Author: discussion moved here: #20

    Things we could include in no particular order..

    - That we aim to make a minimal interface; advanced functionality is
    beyond the scope of this (version of the) API

    - We would like the interface to be general and applicable to
    commonly deployed LRMs, cloud systems, etc. (I know some of this is
    said above)

    - We are focused on executing a process (e.g., popen rather than
    function call)

>     AM: Why actually?  The only point where this shows is the jobspec.

Author: Yeah, ignore that for now, will remove.  I was thinking out loud here: I wanted to check if one could, for example, add a `FunctionSpecification` later on to trigger a   function execution on the backend, for example.

is a set of interfaces that allows the specification and management of
the invocation of application executables. The corresponding
implementations of a job management API is a job management library. A
job management library, through its API, is invoked by a client
application.

Traditionally, job management is implemented on supercomputers by Local
Resource Managers (LRMs), such as PBS/Torque, SLURM, etc. In a first
approximation, a job management API is understood as an abstraction layer
on top of various LRMs.

> Non-Traditionally, job management is also provided by execution managers, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nontraditionally, job management is also provided by execution managers, which
```

[[1]](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/nontraditional#other-words)

## Layers

AM: After the different discussions we had, I am not sure if the API should
really distinguish these layers.  The *implementation* very much needs to, but
I don't see how the description of a job, the management of its execution, or
the semantics of its state would differ between those layers.  I would thus
suggest to limit this discussion to the implementation of the API.

> 

Author: Yes, I'll remove that text - will open an ticket about that point.

## Interaction with LRMs and Scalability

> Implementations should use bulk status operations when interacting with

Reviewer: Maybe something like:

```suggestion
Implementations must use bulk status operations, if available, when interacting with
```

> Implementations should use bulk status operations when interacting with

Author: I am not a fan of forbidding stupid implementations, really.  I mean, semantically that submit loop is correct, so who am I to tell a developer that he must be efficient - that should not be an API compliance issue?

> Implementations should use bulk status operations when interacting with

Reviewer 2: My question is what's the point of having bulk submit if we don't heavily nudge implementers in the direction of making it more efficient than the loop. It being semantically correct seems like the very reason why we should be more forceful here in making it clear that there's more than blindly correct semantics that is expected from implementations.

> Implementations should use bulk status operations when interacting with

Author: Implementers are usually interested in making their stuff useful, so they usually have an incentive to make things fast, stable, scalable, documented, ...  I am just saying that an API spec should not be normative about those things - an API spec should say: if method A is called with parameters C and D, then action E is happening unless error F occurs, causing an exception G, ,,, and so on.  It should *not* say: an implementation must be efficient and well documented and scalable etc. 

I don't want to get hung up on that single should / must, I can revert that.  It's more of a general point: IMHO an API spec defines syntax and semantics of an API, but should not put any constraints on the implementation.  Is an implementation which is slow not compliant?  I implementation A with bulk RPC is slower than implementation B which calls submit individually, but concurrently?  How would you even tell for a closed-source implementation, and ascertain compliance?

## State Consistency

TODO AM: state model should be defined before this section.

> The API specification pre-scribes a state model for jobs.  Backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API specification prescribes a state model for jobs.  Backend
```

Return the state of the job.

<a name="jobstatus-gettime"></a>
```java
Timestamp getTime()
```
Returns the time at which the job has entered this state. The `Timestamp` class
is expected to be provided by the standard library of the language in which the
library is implemented. If such a class is not provided, implementations have

> the discretion of implementing a relevant `Timestamp` class.

Author: TODO AM: msg: clarify purpose: reason for state transitions, error messages for FAILED state, etc.

If the job has exited, returns the exit code, otherwise `null`.

<a name="jobstatus-getcontext"></a>
```java
Map<String, Any>? getContext()
```

Returns additional, backend specific meta data associated with this status, if

> any.  Those meta data may include details on the state transition, backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any.  Those metadata may include details on the state transition, backend
```
